in today's episode of health theory with
Jason Prall we discuss why your social
life is essential for your health the
importance of spending time in nature
how meditation can really improve your
life and these simple things you're not
doing that will extend your lifespan
everybody welcome to health theory
today's guest is Jason Paul he's the
creator and host of the human longevity
project as well as the host of you
optimized radio show and he spent years
interviewing centenarians and a gaggle
of experts on the secrets to longevity
and wellness and he created a 9 episode
docu series that makes all of that
knowledge available to everybody Jason
what I want to know is one what got you
started on this journey like many health
practitioners in the field it was my own
health challenges and so that sent me
down this this new trajectory from an
engineer to a health practitioner and
helping people with their chronic issues
that pursuit led me to sort of the idea
of going around the world to speak with
centenarians from all different cultures
and interviewing them and figuring out
what their life was like what their
culture was like what their environment
was like to help bring some of that
wisdom back with the idea of modern
science backing the the what we see in
the real world and we can also show what
healthy aging looks like because most of
us in the West don't know what a healthy
95 looks like what a ninety eight year
old woman who can till upper soil still
and pick oranges off her tree and read a
newspaper without glasses we don't know
what that looks like I've never seen it
until I had to go to Okinawa to speak
with a woman that was just like that and
what were the things you were struggling
with in the beginning for me it was very
simple stuff it was joint pains and skin
condition type things right and these
were not problems that I that I got
answers to right so even at 13 when my
knee issue started chronic knee issues
right and I was told by the doctor was
overuse and I'm 13 and like even at 13
you know I understood I'm like well but
there's 42 year-old after
the professionals how how could this
possibly be overuse but nevertheless I
didn't have the knowledge base or the
skill set to really think or act any
different than what the doctor was
telling me so not getting to the root
problem not explained to me why this is
happening and trying to mask over the
the issues you start to realize okay you
know all this other stuff is sorta lies
and propaganda and nonsense and when you
really figure out what's going on which
is a you it's at your peeling your
constantly peeling you know you get one
level of understanding then there's
another layer right behind it so it's
not like the floodgates open to some
degree it's actually like a constant
journey of discovery of another layer so
knowing that that's true knowing that
you've talked a lot about like research
is flawed and really understanding how
research happens and how we get into a
sort of flawed data set how do you get
good at the end of one experimentation
when it can be so overwhelming to even
know where to begin how a how did you
get good at that and then what do you
recommend to people now in the age of
Internet to really find answers that
work for them I think you have to
recognize that you are your own
experiment and you have your own
experiences in the process and there's
nobody that can tell you anything about
you you have to figure it out so in one
way it's you feel like you're a little
alone in the process but using other
people and other advices as a guide
perhaps can be useful to help you
navigate the waters but is this
something that would have been done a
thousand years ago or a hundred years
ago based on what we know a pretty good
lens to look through to figure out
should I be trying this is there
somebody on the planet or some group of
people doing this in a healthy way if so
why are my why or why might that be the
case or why might not be the case so
figuring out what may work and what may
not work through the lens of of history
and actual people trying these things is
very helpful to help guide you but it
can in no way dictate your truth so you
just kind of have to start on the
process and course correct and self
navigate but part of that require
you to to an end to listen to to get rid
of all the the biased viewpoints that
you've heard so to some degree you kind
of have to chuck out all that all the
extra knowledge because it's coming from
a different source that is not you so
there are plenty of people that have one
truth that is vastly different than
another truth that somebody might
experience this is why you have so many
arts and the arguments in the nutrition
world because they are very true for
certain people at certain times given
certain contexts and very untrue for the
another person in a different context
different time different set of
conditions so because studies are
controlled experiments that may or may
not even have a good premise to start
with let alone a good conclusion you
cannot apply research to an individual
and think that it's going to always be
the case or ever be the case necessarily
until you try it so you have to kind of
figure it out for yourself
and I don't know any other way to do it
when you were working with clients did
you give them sort of the first rung of
the ladder or was there like a baseline
protocol that you would point them in a
direction I'll give you a possible
example from things that I know that
you've explored so hey you know that you
come from Eastern Europe and what did it
look like from an ancestral standpoint
in Eastern Europe what were the seasons
what would a microbiome of somebody that
grew up in that region probably be like
is that things like that that at least
gives them that first step or is it
literally just as long as its whole
natural food just start experimenting I
mean I think there's more fundamental
aspects of health right you have to get
good sleep step number one so what does
it take to get good sleep right so those
are basic things that we can start with
the way you think and emote in the world
there are ways that we know through
practice and through text and through
history that has shown us that are
generally a better place to be in state
of gratitude right a state of compassion
empathy right these type of things are
kind of a universal concept so despite
where you are on the world who you are
what your conditions are there are sort
of universal truths then I think we need
to start with the food equation becomes
much more difficult partially because
every
affects everything so you can't
subscribe to one diet if your circadian
rhythm is off and think that the that
that same diets going to affect you the
same way when your circadian rhythm is
on when you get good sleep you may or
may not be able to eat this food when
you get bad sleep you may or may not be
able to eat this food so if your diet is
just a representation a part of the
equation that we have to work in and you
cannot separate it from the good sleep
from the negative emotions because we
know that when you eat a McDonald's
hamburger which we can all agree it's
not the healthiest food if you're in a
state of peace and you're on a beach and
you're with friends and you're laughing
and you're you don't think this
McDonald's hamburger is going to kill
you we know that we digest it better we
know there's less inflammation at the
gut we know that it doesn't impact us
the same way however when we're driving
down the road we're stressed out we're
on the phone we're doing a million
things we're eating all at the same time
the same meal we digest it differently
more inflammation more food
sensitivities all these things start to
come up so you can't isolate one part of
the equation and think that you can find
the answer in that one part you've got
to work it all together and this is the
point of looking at the entirety of the
lifestyle to understand what works for
the individual all right so you're
starting to touch on what I think are
gonna be answers to really my
overarching questions for the whole
interview which is what are the keys to
longevity I mean it fundamentally it all
comes down to lifestyle and that that
encompasses everything right so that is
how we think that's how we emot-- that's
how we communicate that's how we connect
that's that's that's diet is all
factored into this but if you take
anybody you know and say okay let's
let's go through your closet let's toss
out all the old stuff right there's
inevitably things in the closet that
they don't where they don't use there's
gonna be a resistance to throw it to
giving away some of these clothes why
you're giving away clothes that you
don't wear to somebody who may need them
in theory that's an easy decision but
you have an emotional attachment to
something in in that piece of clothing
and yet we can't get rid of it so
there's just in this abundance so that
we all have here in the West this
overabundance this over convenience we
are complexify
and so in this let's say closet example
we have stored emotions trapped emotions
we have this clogged up stuff and so
when you are able to get rid of that you
actually are freeing yourself of these
trapped emotions of this attachment to
garbage that it's really not useful to
you so we find this in everything that
we have in our lives
relationships you ever get invited to a
party you don't really want to go to and
you kind of go anyway I mean why is that
right we need to simplify every part of
our life we are over complicating
everything and what you realize when you
go to these places you see that
everything is so simple and the
requirements for your happiness and
health are very little you don't need a
lot of things to be happy and healthy
and yet we are searching for them and
all these things and we get bogged down
by them so just by simplifying your
environment your relationships
everything around you you change your
behavior and this is where the change
comes from it's in the behavior but the
simplicity is the catalyst for that
behavioral change so it's a it's a
critical part and it's one of the most
fundamental things that I recognized
that I wasn't anticipating when I went
to these places when we showed up in
Costa Rica for example we use an area
that pays your notice those known for
its longevity right and we're going
there to find these hundred year olds to
talk to them right and it's not like
there's a list of them and I have their
emails right like you got to go figure
out how to find these people so and we
had a limited time in the limited budget
so in theory this is kind of a stressful
situation right we've got a clock that
we've got to run up against and yet when
we got there I felt like time slowed
down or stopped it's almost like
comparing driving on the freeway at 70
miles an hour and you just see all these
cars going 70 miles an hour you got to
go 70 miles an hour right versus walking
down the street on a walk you just
rolling down around a lake you know and
everybody else is strolling around the
lake there's a different pace there
you're going with the flow to some
degree in the flow is affecting you I
want to push down this path a little bit
because it's something that you brought
up that I had never heard before at
least not in these words I think you
called it social genomics yeah so the
interrelatedness of the people that
you're close to and I don't know if you
meant it quite like what we're talking
about now which is maybe a little bit
broader
but you had talked about the difference
between a Costa Rica and a New York
and how just the way that it affects you
on a physiological level is pretty
interesting it's massive
yeah and Social genomics can can
typically it's referring to human human
interactions but to be honest it's
everything right so it's it's but it's
this the way you inter interact with
your environment will actually dictate
your genetic expression and there are
mechanisms through which we can explain
this via the nervous system do tell I'm
super curious especially if you know
anything about forest bathing oh yes you
know yeah yeah so what what is that on a
biological level well so this it gets it
gets fairly esoteric if you get to the
real level I think but fundamentally if
we want to stay in the physical
discussion here both we know that just
being in nature or even looking at a
painting of nature changes your
brainwave state we can measure this it
changes your nervous system the state of
your nervous system changes you more to
the parasympathetic the rest and digest
when you start to change the nervous
system function if you talk to any
chiropractor for example they'll tell
you that changes everything
the nervous system is a fundamental
connecting point through which our body
operates so now the question is is how
does the nervous system shift there is
something there and we all feel it when
we go to a beach when we get outside and
and the Sun hits our skin that we know
that it's affecting us right and it
affects the brain it affects the nervous
system affects hormonal fluctuations it
exchanges the way our microbiota are
behaving and and let's not forget we are
mostly microbiota we are mostly viral
and bacterial and fungal genetic
material we are to even think about what
a human is is a weird concept because
most of your function is carried out by
these organisms that are not you they
are there with you and part of you but
not you one thing just and I don't want
to lose this thread and I really want to
get back to the really esoteric part but
there was something that you've talked
about where you said that it almost
doesn't even matter just what bacteria
or viruses or whatever you have it
matters what how their genes are
expressing and that they all have their
own genetics and epigenetics and I think
that's really really interesting in the
field of you know
a great functional complementary
medicine that we're now obsessed with
this idea of epigenetics I think
generally what we're referring to is
that our human genome is expressing
differently but I find it more
fascinating that you also have
mitochondrial genome right in
mitochondria these little organelles
that are inside the cells that have
their own genome that are not human so
we have human genome mitochondrial
genome we have microbiota genome and all
of these can shift and change based on
the interactions with the external world
some of which those inputs are actually
genetic material themselves so when you
eat an apple you actually have micro RNA
from the Apple interacting with your
genes so now you have all these genetic
systems and components working together
in unison all trying to accomplish the
same thing which is balanced in the
ecosystem that it's in this is all
changing whenever you think a thought
whenever you have whenever you have sex
whenever you get to get mad or upset or
you feel depressed
whenever you exercise everything is
changing when you're when we think about
blessing our food for example or saying
a prayer before a meal
so it's this there's gratitude a very
basic gratitude practice that will
improve digestion so this is I think an
important recognition point that
everything is affecting everything your
thoughts your emotions your behaviors
will determine the state of all the
organisms in your body in the state your
cellular health your organ health and
overall organism health and if we can
accept that premise
then that means everything we do matters
and then nothing becomes out of your
control it all becomes part of you and
part of your practice to get into a
state of harmony and balance super
interesting all right so now let's go
back we were forced bathing we were
about to get esoteric like take me to
the craziest place you can even just
from an end of one perspective and I'm
asking this from the context of the last
three years of my life have taught me
that I know nothing and that I need to
truly be open to things that I would
have closed my mind off to when I
thought I knew something and now I'm
just super open - I know nothing and
this is an exploration I mean I think
for me it came through
of exploring personally with plant
medicines and by that you mean
psychedelics yeah ayahuasca and five Meo
DMT and some of these other things you
know psilocybin they they show you
something different and it's hard to put
into words because it's a it's a
different connection point so that is
sort of a frame of reference that I have
another one is through the pasta and
meditation and the experience is I the
changes in the and the things that I
felt and and went through during that
process can you define what style of
meditation that is so the pasta is sort
of a meditation technique that's that's
thought to be taught through the line of
the Buddha himself and it's a simple
style of meditation that teaches you to
be in the present moment without
attachment so it's not there's no
mantras involved there's no
visualization involved there's no
sending love our gratitude anywhere it's
simply being in the moment and
recognizing what is and whatever pains
or discomforts or thoughts or feelings
or whatever is coming through to detach
yourself from that so it's almost like
removing emotion from the external world
so that you master your inner self and
your inner peace and balance just going
through that improve my knee pain in a
10 day retreat so what is that well I
would argue that there was emotions and
I was holding on to that manifested in
the body and when I was able to detach
from those and let those go the pain
lets go
there are these energies I think that we
store in our body and this practice of a
possum tation taught me that that's
likely the case and if you had to give
me that and like the most plain boring
language ever
what would you say like what is the
process of turning inward what are you
doing there are so many things there
right so you know we have studies
showing that when you put a rat in a
maze or a mouse in a maze and you
electrocute it at one point in the maze
you take the mouse out never to see the
maze again and they have pups and you
put the pups in the same maze we can see
their nervous system spike at that same
exact point how we're still trying to
figure that out right we have some
theories and
some evidence to suggest a few things
perhaps the DNA storing memory perhaps
water storing memory perhaps the whole
body and the fascist doing memory but
that's actually a really smart
evolutionary advantage like hey let's
pass down that don't go there that's
dangerous
so it actually may serve a fundamental
purpose but we know that that's the case
now we can take that mouse out which has
never been electrocuted and they have
pups we see the same thing and we've
gone six seven generations through this
and you can still see that manifesting
your fur - that is inherited trauma
inherited drama we also see studies
showing that Holocaust survivors have
the same thing elevated nervous system
response straight out the gate you know
coming out of their kids absolutely yeah
so this is I think a real thing and we
have to recognize that it's playing a
role now how do we unwind that this is
where all the practices come in this is
why all the Eastern traditions and even
even the Western religions have a ritual
have a practice of things so this is
what the meditation is there to do it's
the practice that allows you to escape
that reality Yoga saying thank you so
define the reality so the you've got
traumas built from your own life or from
potentially inherited traumas and so
breaking the sort of hold they have in
your behaviors let's take a more
practical example right I've gotten to
the point wreck and actually spot this a
mile away now the first time I'm talking
to somebody but they might be sexually
abused at six years old that I can hear
that in their voice in their language
because of the fear the uncertainty and
there's something going on you can see I
can see it an email by the language
that's used Wow
right if you just get good at
recognizing the patterns and you start
to recognize okay there's something
there how do we unwind it well if it's
manifesting as you know lupus or
rheumatoid arthritis or cancer later on
where's the problem you got to go all
the way back to that point and get the
resolution of that as part of the
problem because it has some biological
echo because I think they're absolutely
because the nervous system is shifted so
we essentially have two states of our
nervous system one is there the rest and
digest right let's stay in
play this is where we have sex this is
where we sleep and eat food and all
these amazing fun nice things then you
have the basically the mode that we're
stressed out in right it's why you can't
get an erection and running away from a
bear right there are two different modes
you would never need those two functions
to operate at the same time right so we
have a it's a it's a survival mechanism
that kicks in if you stay locked in to
that then that means that your process
of digestion your process of healing
your process of recovery process of
sleep process of sex all those things
aren't working very well or at all so
this prevents recovery and healing so
the the act of coming into this world
with a cord around your neck or getting
abused when you're a child and you don't
know how to operate in this world you
will create a nervous system shift that
is there to protect you it's why when
somebody cut somebody off in traffic and
they freak out and you're like whoa that
guy just completely flipped out for no
reason well you wouldn't do that maybe
but why there's something embedded in
that behavior in that habit in that
pattern that comes from something else
so these things get ingrained in
patterns and personalities you actually
see this with people that are successful
a lot of successful people had some
traumatic event or events and happen
their childhood and it may be as simple
as a nasty divorce between their parents
but oftentimes it's abuse it's verbal
abuse emotional abuse sexual abuse an
alcoholic parent a parent that gets
arrested that's incarcerated these are
traumatic for a child because they don't
know how to understand this so they
develop these these stories these
patterns these behaviors that come from
that and some of the behaviors may be
because I wasn't getting love because my
mom made me cry it out instead of
hugging me when I was six months I
needed to go find a way to get love
which means I'm really good at the
violin or I'm an amazing football player
or I'm really good at math right and so
you carry these behaviors now you might
produce a really good football player
you might produce Oprah Winfrey right
these are the things that can manifest
it doesn't mean it's a bad thing it can
just manifest in behavior and the
personality that we think we are
is coming from a lot of that stuff so so
I think that the important thing is that
we have to recognize that that's a real
reality but we can undo the parts that
we don't need anymore can you put a
finger on that like what are some of
those basic discipline practices I mean
they're simple this it's just meditation
the practice of sitting still and
quieting the mind and figuring out
what's coming up and allow things to
come through now there's a number of
different meditation styles like I said
I like the pasta one because it brings
me here instead of trying to escape and
allows me to let go of what is let go of
the attachment to the things that are
around me and just accept what it is and
when I did the pasta meditation my knee
pain started to slowly sort of evaporate
go away except or what 20-something
years so explain that I don't know I was
just in meditation and and when the pain
was coming up I wasn't trying to run
from it I wasn't stretching my legs to
relieve the pain I was just experiencing
it without judgment so an easy example
of this would be when your arm when you
have an itch on your arm your natural
tendency is to scratch because you want
to relieve the pain notice I don't like
that feeling so let me scratch it away
uh-huh that's better but what if you
just left it and just experience it and
gohan it's interesting without any
emotion but any attachment you just let
it be and in that process it's almost
like it bubbles up to the surface and
just goes poof right so another is
psychosomatic trauma doctor New York he
was a chiropractor I believe I was
looking at backs and back pain and he
would have for the same x-rays the same
physical dysfunction in their back
one person is running marathons the
other one can't get out of bed and he
asked himself what the heck's going on
here it's the same thing physically
what's happening why is this guy
experiencing no pain this one's
experiencing tons of pain and when he
recognized that it was trauma that was
causing that that it was trauma that was
causing the pain and through his work he
actually showed that all you have to do
is sometimes even just let people know
that that's a possibility that that's
what's causing it and then it will go
away I really do feel that we are given
the gift of the body showing us
something that is out of balance and
that's we just have to get it back into
balance and some of this is surface
level stuff you know are you
do you have a lot of toxic food in your
in your house you are using all the
toxins in your in your environment are
you not sleeping enough do you hate the
person you're sleeping next to are you
not using very good language with people
how is your thoughts and your emotional
patterns and it's amazing that when you
accept this responsibility for healing
yourself you accept the gift that that
the pain or that the health issues that
are there they're there for you without
that you wouldn't change you wouldn't be
better
you wouldn't improve there's no need
you're not being forced to so these are
the gifts that we're given to allow
ourselves to get to a better place to
advanced psycho spirituality because
they're the difficulties that
it's the same in business it's the same
in relationships you know look at
anybody in the military or on a sports
team they come together when things get
hard when she hits the fan that's when
the real things start to come together
right in business same thing you
everything that you fail at in business
you would look back and go I'm really
glad that that happened because it
showed me what to do what not to do and
I learned from it right so they're all
gifts it's just a matter of are you
willing to go through the pain and and
and understand it from a different
perspective and move through it and and
and go through the process you've said
that you'd like to push yourself that
you'd like to rub up against your limits
absolutely what's the driving force
behind that I think it's curiosity of
going to a place that I've never been
right now actually one of the latest
things that people are doing is there's
like a template you sting yourself down
your spine with beestings so this
actually stimulates the immune system in
the nervous system very good thing this
is this hormetic stress idea that we
need these little it's like where you
define harm use for people yeah so
hormetic stress is a very important
concept that that there are these little
stressors that come into your life that
are there to help you grow stronger
right and and the easiest one is
exercise this is a very easy example
that in order for a bodybuilder to get
big and strong they have to lift a lot
of weight but you can't go to a 500
pound squat until you go through the
process of getting there so it's this
idea of pushing yourself and then
recovering pushing yourself farther
recovery
yourself farther in recovery and this
happens with plant chemicals when you
eat garlic for example the Alison and
garlic that that makes it have that
pungent taste that makes it antifungal
that all these things that's a poison
it's it's there to protect the garlic
plant and allow it to survive it's the
plants immune system and when you eat it
you are getting the poison you're just
getting a low-level poison that we've
been come accustomed to and learn to
respond in a beneficial way to it same
thing with with with polyphenols and
phytochemical or you know polyphenols
that come from blueberries or red wine
that we all hear about chocolate these
type of things these are not
antioxidants they are actually oxidants
in other words they create oxidation
stress the body responds to that
oxidation stress with antioxidant
genetics kicking in so there's an
antioxidant respond a response to the
pro oxidation of the blueberry you know
juice of the of the blue part of the
blueberry I think this happens with
emotions you know when you start to face
an emotional emotional e difficult
situation you have to learn to kind of
get through that right so to me this is
my exploratory behavior of getting to
places that I've never been emotionally
spiritually physically and through that
process I am allowed to take away
something new that I can't get from a
text to me this is the fundamental
problem we face right now we are in the
Information Age there is overwhelming
amount of information you can get learn
to do anything online but what we what
we're not getting is experience where
we're trading in experience for
information and knowledge and we think
that knowledge is the same thing as this
experiential wisdom and it couldn't be
farther from the truth it is a big
problem I see right now is that people
are not going through the experience all
aspects of life we are simply reading up
reading about it and thinking that we
are really smart and then we try to
teach what we read whereas to me the
more important things comes from the
experience which is why I can talk about
going to Costa Rica and telling you that
time was different and you might say
well time isn't exist or time is linear
or whatever but we all know that place
when time stops or time flew by because
we're having fun that same thing
happened there so that's an experience
that you can't
meet about I can't tell you about you
have to feel it you have to know it
personally and so just today I had
breakfast with somebody very bright
well-educated but they have no idea what
they really want to do and so my
struggle was okay I want them to go
experience and play and like just see a
lot of different things but the thing
that will paralyze them is they don't
even know what to go experience so for
people who you know that's they need to
get that experience or wisdom they've
got enough knowledge what do you tell
them to do like how do they actually go
get usable knowledge the easiest thing
in the world first of all if you don't
know just start doing something do
something you'll figure out you either
don't want to do it or you do want to do
it right pick up a guitar see where that
takes you you may like it you may hate
it that's if you have no idea like your
starting point zero if you have some
idea of who you are and your tendencies
and your your preferences I think the
question we have to ask ourselves is
what do I want
and what do I enjoy what makes me happy
and often times I think we are we are
going down a path and what we think we
want but really it's what our parents
want it's what culture tells us we we
should want it's what we see other
people have that we think we want but
it's not really what we want and so I
think asking yourself what you really
want is is a very easy question may be a
difficult answer at first but if you
just sit with it and and play with that
a little bit I think it's gonna come to
you the other thing is you kind of let
life come to you and accept it in a way
I didn't necessarily ask for a knee pain
and skin issues they kind of came to me
and I went with it and I had the
fortitude to find the answers myself
that I that I wanted to find so in other
words I wanted to be healthy I went to
the doctor couldn't get answers so I was
willing to accept the responsibility to
get the health myself and because I was
willing to accept that responsibility
and go down the path of finding out the
answers to my own health issues that led
me down the path that I'm on now and
forever changed my life right whereas
the other side of it was I was good at
math I went and studied engineering I
became an engineer I did that for ten
years found no value whatsoever in
and end up driving me to a frustrating
place of I don't know what the heck I'm
doing here where am I going go find and
play with the things that you enjoy and
and and recognize what you really want
doesn't mean you know how to get there
but explore that we've just disengaged
so much and we we get afraid and we get
I think overwhelmed but if you just
start participating I mean amazing
things happen that you couldn't have
possibly projected in your wildest
dreams I want to go back to this notion
of connection and the social genomics of
it all
how have you constructed your group of
friends what do you look for how do you
make sure that that's healthy and
thriving in that you've taken care of
that part of the equation yeah this is
this is a big one actually because a lot
of with the previous work that's been
done on longevity in some of these
places that are known for their
longevity has come to the conclusion
that community is one of the most
important things I have it I have an
issue with that I don't think that's
accurate at all I think on the surface
it seems accurate and we we communities
a word that we like to think is a good
thing but communities everywhere it is
easy to find what is more difficult to
find this connection right and this it's
like going on a date right you can go on
million dates to find the one that you
actually put connection with maybe a
little bit different right it's a little
different of an experience so connection
to me is is huge it's tough with friends
and even family because the dynamics
change you grow to different pace right
now the point at which you developed a
friendship with somebody in high school
and college post college whatever it was
at work you were you were that person
and they were that person and you
connected at that point you guys met at
a point that seemed to make sense as you
guys both change that may separate and
you may have to let that go again it
gets back to this idea of impermanence
and not attaching yourself to even
friendships or family which is a it's a
really weird concept to think about but
at the end of the day they're all gonna
go away so I think not attaching
yourself even to a spouse to mother to a
child to a friend is a very important
concept it doesn't mean you can't have
love for them it doesn't mean you can't
but but lose the attachment because
things change and and I think that the
key is recognizing that each moment is
what matters
today's all there is right there is no
tomorrow there's no next year enjoy
today for whatever is in front of you to
be able to be in state of gratitude in
whatever relationship you have in front
of you right now I think is a very
important concept especially in today's
day and age where you have cell phones
taking over and you see people at
restaurants right across from each other
not even speaking or looking in their
cell phone they're not appreciating
what's right in front of them so to me
it's it's very simple and being in in a
place of gratitude and companionship in
connection with the people that are in
front of you that are with you and if
it's not there then you let it go and
you go find something else so it's it's
a complete detachment from the need to
try to create something or or or
identify with a relationship status of
any kind and allowing it just to be what
it is talk to me about purpose which
feels a kinship to this but different
enough to put a point on it I don't like
the word purpose to me the word meaning
is more impactful because purpose
suggests that there's an inherent thing
you're supposed to do or you're supposed
to find and what you find when you look
around at these people in you know these
areas that are that facilitate health
and longevity is that they don't really
feel like they have a purpose in life
they just feel like they have meaning
the meaning is all around them that life
life has purpose but I generate meaning
kind of things saying can you give
examples of like what some of the people
felt was that meaning this this comes
back to simplicity so when we are in the
Western world where we have way too many
conveniences and we are so fortunate the
littlest things lose their meaning right
when you get water you don't think about
how lucky you are
when you buy the bag of apple chips or
organic carrots or whatever you're doing
you don't really think about how
meaningful that is but when you grow
your own carrots and you recognize how
long that took that you were dependent
on things out of your control like the
weather
have more meaning meanings a choice and
it doesn't have to be big and doesn't
have to be small but we've lost a sense
of meaning and we're looking for meaning
in the wrong places how many likes did I
get how many people are following me
right now how much reach did this thing
get how much money was brought in we're
putting meaning in the wrong places
which is why I think we're so unhappy
it's in the most basic fundamental
things that if you just take a walk in
the forest and just sit with yourself
for a sec you start to recognize that
it's kind of cool just being here waking
up each day taking a breath the simple
things in life are very meaningful
having a great conversation with a loved
one super meaningful so it's a meet to
me it's more about the meaning because
meaning brings you into the present
moment it brings you into everything
that's around you purpose is weird
grandiose concept that I think we're
searching for and we're comparing
against other things and does life have
purpose yeah I happen to think it does
what it is I don't know but for me I
just have meaning everywhere that's
pretty incredible before I asked my last
question tell these guys where they can
find you online they can find me at
human longevity film that's where our
film lives they find me on social media
and Facebook and Instagram I just at my
name they can look at the on Facebook we
have the human longevity project and
Instagram as well so perfectly my last
question is given all that you went and
studied with the centenarians and all
the experts that you've met with what is
the one thing that people could change
right now
that would have the biggest impact on
their life I think having gratitude
simple as that find a way to bring
gratitude into your life whether it's a
gratitude journal whether it's sitting
in a meditation and just have feeling a
state of gratitude
whether it's reminding yourself about
gratitude to me this is sort of the
highest state that we can ever be in is
a state of gratitude and so constantly
just reminding yourself right getting in
these little habits of remembering to be
grateful for whatever is is around you
right now because at the end of the day
you're here it's a simple it's it's
cheesy it's probably overused it's sort
of this spiritual stuff that we shove
under the rug but
you just start putting in practice you
recognize how simple it really is I love
it
Jason thank you so much for having
really great my pleasure
all right guys I did not expect the
interview to go to the places that we
went today but that is exactly why I
find Jason so interesting and is
something that I think you're gonna see
as you go and dive into the other
interviews and things that he's done and
follow him socially you're see that it's
somebody looking at things from a really
unique perspective which is that we're
probably over focusing on the wrong
minutia and instead of really going in
and just looking at you know your blood
ketone levels or your glucose levels
that you're coming up higher and you're
really getting in tune yourself that you
are instead of sweeping spirituality
under the rug you're taking it out
you're looking at it you're really
looking to find what are the drivers of
some of the states that your body is in
and whether that's trauma or not but
really beginning to look at it delve
into it and doing the end of one
experimentation and finding out for
yourself what's going to work and it's
hard to pin him down on exactly what to
like eat because you've got to do the
work you've got to take responsibility
you've got to do the experimentations
and find out what works for you and to
not be dogmatic to not overly rely on
knowledge like he was saying but instead
to really get that experiential wisdom
and I thought that that was really
interesting and everything that he does
is in that context of having spoken to
all these people that have lived these
extraordinarily long lives and looking
at the experts and blending the more
esoteric too hard to really put our
hands on and the data and really looking
at where the two come together I think
it's a really unique perspective that I
think it's incredibly powerful and I
hope that you guys will dive into that
in your own lives and start putting it
into practice those kinds of things have
had a tremendous impact on me already
and I think that you guys will benefit
as well if you haven't already be sure
to subscribe and until next time my
friends be legendary take care thank you
guys so much for watching and being a
part of this community if you haven't
already be sure to subscribe you're
gonna get weekly videos on building a
growth mindset cultivating grit and
unlocking your full
and sure